IBX-5609 - Extend Shipping module (#2037)
ezsystems/developer-documentation: docs/commerce/shipping_management/extend_shipping.md

## Create custom shipping method type

If your application needs shipping methods of other type than the default ones, you create custom shipping method types. 
See the code samples below to learn how you could do it.
 
### Define custom shipping method type class

Create a definition of the shipping method type. 
Use a built-in type factory to define the class in `config/services.yaml`:

``` yaml
[[= include_file('code_samples/front/shop/shipping/config/packages/services.yaml', 0, 1) =]] [[= include_file('code_samples/front/shop/shipping/config/packages/services.yaml', 1, 8) =]]
```

At this point a custom shipping method type should be visible in the user interface.

### Create options form

In `src/ShippingMethodType/Form/Type/`, create the `CustomShippingMethodOptionsType.php` form type that corresponds to the custom shipping method type.

You also define a name of the custom shipping method type here, by using the `getTranslationMessages` method.

``` php hl_lines="32"
[[= include_file('code_samples/front/shop/shipping/src/ShippingMethodType/Form/Type/CustomShippingMethodOptionsType.php') =]]
```

> In `translations/`, create a translations file that stores a name value for the custom shipping method type, for example:

Reviewer: It could be interesting to give the file name as reader may not remember the `<domain>.<lang>.<format>` convention.
```suggestion
In `translations/`, create a translations file `ibexa_shipping.en.yaml` that stores a name value for the custom shipping method type, for example:
```

Here, you create an options validator class that checks whether the user provided the `customer_identifier` value and dispatches an error when needed.

Use the type factory to define a compound validator class in `config/services.yaml`:

``` yaml
[[= include_file('code_samples/front/shop/shipping/config/packages/services.yaml', 0, 1) =]] [[= include_file('code_samples/front/shop/shipping/config/packages/services.yaml', 15, 22) =]]
```

Then, in `src/ShippingMethodType/`, create the validator class:

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/front/shop/shipping/src/ShippingMethodType/CustomerNotNullValidator.php') =]]
```

Finally, register the validator as a service:

``` yaml
[[= include_file('code_samples/front/shop/shipping/config/packages/services.yaml', 0, 1) =]] [[= include_file('code_samples/front/shop/shipping/config/packages/services.yaml', 22, 25) =]]
```

### Create storage converter

Before form data can be stored in database tables, field values must be converted to a storage-specific format.
Here, the storage converter converts the `customer_identifier` string value into the `customer_id` numerical value.

> In `src/ShippingMethodType/Storage`, create the `StorageConverter.php` class:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In `src/ShippingMethodType/Storage/StorageConverter.php`, create the `StorageConverter` class:
```

```

### Create storage converter

Before form data can be stored in database tables, field values must be converted to a storage-specific format.
Here, the storage converter converts the `customer_identifier` string value into the `customer_id` numerical value.

In `src/ShippingMethodType/Storage`, create a `StorageConverter.php` file with the storage converter class:

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/front/shop/shipping/src/ShippingMethodType/Storage/StorageConverter.php') =]]
```

Then, register the storage converter as a service:

``` yaml
[[= include_file('code_samples/front/shop/shipping/config/packages/services.yaml', 0, 1) =]][[= include_file('code_samples/front/shop/shipping/config/packages/services.yaml', 25, 28) =]]
```

#### Storage definition 

Now, create a storage definition class and a corresponding schema.
The table stores information specific for the custom shipping method type.

!!! note "Create table"

    Before you can proceed, in your database, create a table that has columns present in the storage definition, for example:

>     `CREATE TABLE ibexa_shipping_method_region_custom(id int, customer_id text, shipping_method_region_id int);`

Reviewer: Actually, the `id` column is always `NULL`.
I think that the column `id` seem unused because it has to fill itself automatically:
```suggestion
    `CREATE TABLE ibexa_shipping_method_region_custom(id int auto_increment primary key, customer_id text, shipping_method_region_id int);`
```

> In `src/ShippingMethodType/Storage`, create `StorageDefinition.php` and `StorageSchema.php` files with their corresponding classes.

Reviewer 2: Each code snippet should have its own instruction, or you should add names, so it's clear which is which without looking into the code.

> In `src/ShippingMethodType/Storage`, create `StorageDefinition.php` and `StorageSchema.php` files with their corresponding classes.

Author: ```suggestion
Create a `src/ShippingMethodType/Storage/StorageDefinition.php` file with the storage definition: 
```

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/front/shop/shipping/src/ShippingMethodType/Storage/StorageDefinition.php') =]]
```

> ``` php

Author: ```suggestion
Then, create a `src/ShippingMethodType/Storage/StorageSchema.php` file with the storage schema:

``` php
```

[[= include_file('code_samples/front/shop/shipping/src/ShippingMethodType/Storage/StorageSchema.php') =]]
```

Then, register the storage definition as a service:

``` yaml
[[= include_file('code_samples/front/shop/shipping/config/packages/services.yaml', 0, 1) =]][[= include_file('code_samples/front/shop/shipping/config/packages/services.yaml', 28, 31) =]]
```

> ![Creating a shipping method of custom type](img/custom_shipping_method_type.png "Creating a shipping method of custom type")

Reviewer 2: Also blurry, it could use some short description.

## Toggle shipping method type availability

When you implement a web store, you can choose if a certain shipping method is available for selection during checkout.
Here, you limit shipping method availability to customers who meet a specific condition.

> In `src/ShippingMethodType/Voter`, create a `CustomVoter.php` file with a voter class:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Create a `src/ShippingMethodType/Vote/CustomVoter.php` file with a voter class:
```

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/front/shop/shipping/src/ShippingMethodType/Voter/CustomVoter.php') =]]
```

Register the voter as a service:

``` yaml
[[= include_file('code_samples/front/shop/shipping/config/packages/services.yaml', 0, 1) =]][[= include_file('code_samples/front/shop/shipping/config/packages/services.yaml', 31, 34) =]]
```

## Display shipping method parameters in shipping method details view

You can extend the default  shipping method details view by making shipping method visible on the **Cost** tab.

> To do this, in `src/ShippingMethodType/Cost`, create a `CustomCostFormatter.php` file with a formatter class:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To do this, create a `src/ShippingMethodType/Cost/CustomCostFormatter.php` file with a formatter class:
```

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/front/shop/shipping/src/ShippingMethodType/Cost/CustomCostFormatter.php') =]]
```

Then register the formatter as a service:

``` yaml
[[= include_file('code_samples/front/shop/shipping/config/packages/services.yaml', 0, 1) =]][[= include_file('code_samples/front/shop/shipping/config/packages/services.yaml', 34, 38) =]]
```

> 

Reviewer 2: We could use a screenshot here.
The whole PR after doc review should go through QA.

Author: Already asked on a proper channel but there was no response. Will try again

!!! note "Create table"

    Before you can proceed, in your database, create a table that has columns present in the storage definition, for example:

    `CREATE TABLE ibexa_shipping_method_region_custom(id int auto_increment primary key, customer_id text, shipping_method_region_id int);`

Create a `src/ShippingMethodType/Storage/StorageDefinition.php` file with a storage definition: 

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/front/shop/shipping/src/ShippingMethodType/Storage/StorageDefinition.php') =]]
```

Then, create a `src/ShippingMethodType/Storage/StorageSchema.php` file with a storage schema:

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/front/shop/shipping/src/ShippingMethodType/Storage/StorageSchema.php') =]]
```

Then, register the storage definition as a service:

``` yaml
[[= include_file('code_samples/front/shop/shipping/config/packages/services.yaml', 0, 1) =]][[= include_file('code_samples/front/shop/shipping/config/packages/services.yaml', 28, 31) =]]
```

## Toggle shipping method type availability

When you implement a web store, you can choose if a certain shipping method is available for selection during checkout.

> Here, you limit shipping method availability to customers who meet a specific condition.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here, you limit shipping method availability to customers who belog to Acme company.
```

Create a `src/ShippingMethodType/Vote/CustomVoter.php` file with a voter class:

``` php
[[= include_file('code_samples/front/shop/shipping/src/ShippingMethodType/Voter/CustomVoter.php') =]]
```

Register the voter as a service:

``` yaml
[[= include_file('code_samples/front/shop/shipping/config/packages/services.yaml', 0, 1) =]][[= include_file('code_samples/front/shop/shipping/config/packages/services.yaml', 31, 34) =]]
```

> ## Display shipping method parameters in shipping method details view

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Display shipping method parameters in details view
```
